Added example to user guide for cloud checkpointing (#20045)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/tune/user-guide.rst

 * use pre-emptible machines (by automatically restoring from last checkpoint)
 * Pausing trials when using Trial Schedulers such as HyperBand and PBT.

Let's cover how to configure your checkpoints storage location, checkpointing frequency, and how to resume from a previous run.

A simple (cloud) checkpointing example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Cloud storage-backed Tune checkpointing is the recommended best practice for both performance and reliability reasons. It also enables checkpointing if using Ray on Kubernetes, which does not work out of the box with rsync-based sync, which relies on SSH. If you'd rather checkpoint locally or use rsync based checkpointing, see here.

Reviewer: "here" - link missing?

.. code-block:: python

    # Restored previous trial from the given checkpoint
    tune.run(
        # our same trainable as before
        durable_trainer_with_params,

        # The name can be different from your original name
        name="my-tune-exp-restart",

        # our same config as above!
        restore=sync_config,
    )

A simple local/rsync checkpointing example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Local or rsync checkpointing can be a good option if:

1. You want to tune on a single laptop Ray cluster
2. You aren't using Ray on Kubernetes (rsync doesn't work with Ray on Kubernetes)
3. You don't want to use S3

Let's take a look at an example:

.. code-block:: python

    import ray
    from ray import tune
    from your_module import my_trainable

    ray.init(address="<cluster-IP>:<port>")  # set `address=None` to train on laptop

    # configure how checkpoints are sync'd to the scheduler/sampler 
    sync_config = tune.syncConfig(sync_to_driver=True)

    # with_parameters() ensures when we checkpoint, weights are saved (not just hyperparameters)

>     durable_trainer_with_params = tune.with_parameters(my_trainable)

Reviewer: Ah this is not correct - let's not use `with_parameters` here at all

Generally, `with_parameters` is used to e.g. re-use data across trainables. It saves parameters in the object store to be re-used, similarly to `functools.partial` - we don't use this ere, so let's just directly pass the trainable below

 * use pre-emptible machines (by automatically restoring from last checkpoint)
 * Pausing trials when using Trial Schedulers such as HyperBand and PBT.

Let's cover how to configure your checkpoints storage location, checkpointing frequency, and how to resume from a previous run.

A simple (cloud) checkpointing example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Cloud storage-backed Tune checkpointing is the recommended best practice for both performance and reliability reasons. rsync-based checkpointing is also incompatible with Ray on Kubernetes. If you'd rather checkpoint locally or use rsync based checkpointing, see here.

Reviewer: Link missing ("here")

also, please add a sentence of context here (explain ssh based rsync checkpointing) - it may not be clear for users that this is the default way. 

I'd also rather frame this positively ("it also enables checkpointing if using Ray on Kubernetes, which does not work out of the box" or so).

Author: How do I link to an anchor? "here" would ideally link to the `A simple local/rsync checkpointing example` section below

Prequisities to use cloud checkpointing in Ray Tune for the example below:

Your ``my_trainable`` is either a:

   1. **Model with an existing Ray integration**
   
      * XGBoost (`example <https://github.com/ray-project/xgboost_ray#hyperparameter-tuning>`_)
      * Pytorch (`example <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/tune/tutorials/tune-pytorch-lightning.html#putting-it-together>`_)
      * Pytorch Lightning (`example <https://github.com/ray-project/ray_lightning#hyperparameter-tuning-with-ray-tune>`_)
      * Keras (`example <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/tune/examples/tune_mnist_keras.html>`_)
      * Tensorflow (`example <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/raysgd/raysgd_tensorflow.html#tftrainer-example>`_)
      * LightGBM (`example <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/lightgbm-ray.html#hyperparameter-tuning>`_)
  
   2. **Custom training function**
   

>       * All this means is that your function has to expose a ``checkpoint_dir`` argument in the function signature, and call ``tune.checkpoint_dir``. See this example, it's quite simple to do.

Author: I want to link here to `custom_func_checkpointing.rst`, but not sure how to do that

Let's assume for this example you're running this script from your laptop, and connecting to your remote Ray cluster via ``ray.init()``, making your script on your laptop the "driver".

.. code-block:: python

    import ray
    from ray import tune
    from your_module import my_trainable

    ray.init(address="<cluster-IP>:<port>")  # set `address=None` to train on laptop

    # configure how checkpoints are sync'd to the scheduler/sampler 
    # we recommend cloud storage checkpointing as it survives the cluster when
    # instances are terminated, and has better performance
    sync_config = tune.syncConfig(
        upload_dir="s3://my-checkpoints-bucket/path/",  # requires AWS credentials
        sync_to_cloud=True,
        sync_to_driver=False  # recommended for performance when using cloud checkpointing 
    )

    # here we wrap our Ray model (or custom training func) with a couple of things:

>     # 1) with_parameters() ensures when we checkpoint, weights are saved (not just hyperparameters)

Reviewer 2: this isn't correct. `with_parameters` is used to pass additional constants to the tuning function, especially ones that are too large (eg. data). it has nothing to do with checkpointing

Author: got it. so why would one use that? and is simply `tune.durable(my_trainable)` good enough here?

Reviewer 2: You'd use it in this case:
```
def trainable_func(conf, data):
    # code

tune.run(tune.with_parameters(trainable_func, data=data))
```

`data` will be put into the object store internally for efficient sharing

Reviewer: Just FYI, `tune.durable()` will be deprecated this week, so might have to adjust docs then

    # 2) durable() ensures that this trainer can be saved to cloud storage (ie: S3)
    durable_trainer_with_params = tune.with_parameters(tune.durable(my_trainable))

    # this starts the run!
    tune.run(
        durable_trainer_with_params,

        # name of your experiment 
        name="my-tune-exp",

        # a directory where results are stored before being
        # sync'd to head node/cloud storage
        local_dir="/tmp/mypath",

        # see above! we will sync our checkpoints to S3 directory
        sync_config=sync_config,

        # we'll checkpoint every 10 iterations, keep the best five

>         # checkpoints (by AUC score, descending), and always checkpoint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # checkpoints (by AUC score, reported by the trainable, descending), and always checkpoint
```

Author: what does `reported by the trainable` mean here?

Reviewer 2: `max-auc` needs to be in `tune.report` inside the trainable (`tune.report(max-auc=score)`)

        # at the end of the last run!
        checkpoint_score_attr="max-auc",
        keep_checkpoints_num=5,
        checkpoint_freq=10,
        checkpoint_at_end=True,

        # a very useful trick! this will resume from the last run specified by
        # sync_config (if one exists), otherwise it will start a new tuning run
        resume="AUTO",
    )

In this example, checkpoints will be saved:

> * **Locally**: not saved! we set ``sync_to_driver=False``, so nothing will be sync'd to the driver (your laptop)

Reviewer 2: If you are using Ray Client, *nothing* will be synced to the laptop, no matter the sync config. `driver` in sync_config, confusingly, is the machine where the Tune driver process is running - in case of Ray Client, that will be the cluster head node, not laptop

Author: oh that is super confusing. so it really should be named `sync_to_head`, yes?

Reviewer 2: It made more sense before we had ray client, but yeah, it is confusing now

Reviewer 2: @worldveil This still needs addressing

Author: @Yard1 can you adjust the wording here in a suggestion (CMD+G) ? haven't gotten the chance to fully understand here and might just be quicker to have to change the wording

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Locally**: not saved! Nothing will be sync'd to the driver (your laptop) automatically
```

* **S3**: ``s3://my-checkpoints-bucket/path/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``

> * **On head node**: ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``

Reviewer 2: See previous comment. In this example, the head node will only have trials that ran on it, just like the worker nodes, due to `sync_to_driver=False`

> * **On head node**: ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``

Author: ```suggestion
* **On head node**: ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>`` (will only have trials run on the head node)
```

Author: @Yard1 added suggestion

* **On workers nodes**: ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>`` (but only for trials done on that node)

If your run stopped for any reason (finished, errored, user CTRL+C), you can restart it any time by running the script above again -- note with ``resume="AUTO"``, it will detect the previous run so long as the ``sync_config`` points to the same location.

If, however, you prefer not to use ``resume="AUTO"`` (or are on an older version of Ray) you can resume manaully:

.. code-block:: python

    # Restored previous trial from the given checkpoint
    tune.run(
        # our same trainable as before
        durable_trainer_with_params,

        # The name can be different from your original name
        name="my-tune-exp-restart",

        # our same config as above!
        restore=sync_config,
    )

A simple local/rsync checkpointing example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Local or rsync checkpointing can be a good option if:

Author: Double check me on this list!

Reviewer 2: This looks fine. I guess you can also add "if you are not interested in persistence"

3. You don't want to use S3

Let's take a look at an example:

.. code-block:: python

    import ray
    from ray import tune
    from your_module import my_trainable

    ray.init(address="<cluster-IP>:<port>")  # set `address=None` to train on laptop

    # configure how checkpoints are sync'd to the scheduler/sampler 
    sync_config = tune.syncConfig(sync_to_driver=True)

    # with_parameters() ensures when we checkpoint, weights are saved (not just hyperparameters)
    durable_trainer_with_params = tune.with_parameters(my_trainable)

    # this starts the run!
    tune.run(
        durable_trainer_with_params,

        # name of your experiment 
        name="my-tune-exp",

        # a directory where results are stored before being
        # sync'd to head node/cloud storage
        local_dir="/tmp/mypath",

        # sync our checkpoints via rsync
        sync_config=sync_config,

        # we'll checkpoint every 10 iterations, keep the best five
        # checkpoints (by AUC score, descending), and always checkpoint
        # at the end of the last run!
        checkpoint_score_attr="max-auc",
        keep_checkpoints_num=5,
        checkpoint_freq=10,

>         checkpoint_at_end=True,

Reviewer: These two only work with class trainables (not with funciton trainables that we've been describing before)!

Function trainables have to manage checkpoint frequency themselves (as we can't invoke the checkpointing logic deliberately). So in that case, just get rid of these arguments

 * use pre-emptible machines (by automatically restoring from last checkpoint)
 * Pausing trials when using Trial Schedulers such as HyperBand and PBT.

Let's cover how to configure your checkpoints storage location, checkpointing frequency, and how to resume from a previous run.

A simple checkpointing example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    from ray import tune
    from your_module import my_pytorch_training_func

> 

Author: ray.init(address="cluster IP")

    # configure how your checkpoints are sync'd to the scheduler/sampler 
    # to enable tuning. we recommend cloud storage checkpointing as it survives the
    # cluster when your instances are terminated
    sync_config = tune.syncConfig(
        upload_dir="s3://my-checkpoints-bucket/path/",  # requires AWS credentials

>         sync_to_cloud=True  # this can also be a func for custom logic!

Author: sync_to_driver=False

    )

    tune.run(
        # wrapping your function in tune.with_parameters() just ensures that 
        # when checkpoints happen, all the trained parameters are saved alongside, 
        # not just your model's hyperparameters! useful if you want your checkpoints 
        # to be "inference ready" checkpoints of your models

>         tune.with_parameters(my_pytorch_training_func),

Author: ```suggestion
        tune.with_parameters(tun.durable(my_pytorch_training_func)),
```

        # name of your experiment 
        name="my-tune-exp",

        # a directory where results are stored before being
        # sync'd to head node/cloud storage
        local_dir="/tmp",

        # see above! we will sync our checkpoints to S3 directory
        sync_config=sync_config,

        # we'll checkpoint every 10 iterations, keep the best five
        # checkpoints (by AUC score, descending), and always checkpoint
        # at the end of the last run!
        checkpoint_score_attr="max-auc",
        keep_checkpoints_num=5,
        checkpoint_freq=10,
        checkpoint_at_end=True,
    )

In this example, checkpoints will be saved:

> * Locally: ``local_dir/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``

Author: if sync_to_driver=False AND running locally from laptop → cluster, then this NOT stored locally

if sync_to_driver=False AND run with ray submit, then only trials run on head will be on head

* S3: ``s3://my-checkpoints-bucket/path/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``
* On head node: ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``
* On workers nodes (but only for trials done on that node): ``~/ray-results/my-tune-exp/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``

Note that if want to use checkpointing with a custom training function (not a Ray integration like PyTorch or Tensorflow), you must expose a ``checkpoint_dir`` argument in the function signature, and call ``tune.checkpoint_dir``. You can find an example of this here.

If your run stopped for any reason (finished, errored, user CTRL+C), you can restart it any time with the following:

.. code-block:: python

    # Restored previous trial from the given checkpoint
    tune.run(
        # our same trainable as before
        tune.with_parameters(my_pytorch_training_func),

        # The name can be different from your original name
        name="my-tune-exp-restart",

        # our same config as above!

>         restore=sync_config,

Author: restore= vs resume=True ?

Author: sync_config=sync_config, resume="REMOTE" (would start from cloud checkpoint)

Author: sync_config=sync_config, resume="AUTO" (would start from cloud checkpoint if exists, else would start new)

    )

.. _tune-distributed-checkpointing:

> 

Author: Could use this example:
https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/python/ray/tune/examples/xgboost_example.py

On a multinode cluster, Tune automatically creates a copy of all trial checkpoints on the head node. This requires the Ray cluster to be started with the :ref:`cluster launcher <cluster-cloud>` and also requires rsync to be installed.

> Note that you must use the ``tune.checkpoint_dir`` API to trigger syncing (or use a Ray built-in model type described here).

Author: Also want to link to that example `custom_func_checkpointing.rst` or a better one from github.

> Note that you must use the ``tune.checkpoint_dir`` API to trigger syncing (or use a Ray built-in model type described here). See :doc:`/tune/examples/custom_func_checkpointing` for an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you must use the ``tune.checkpoint_dir`` API to trigger syncing (or use a model type with a built-in Ray Tune integration as described here). See :doc:`/tune/examples/custom_func_checkpointing` for an example.
```
